# Impact of Lung Transplant Patient Characteristics on Blood Transfusion Requirements and Clinical Outcomes: BTC1877H Final Project
Lung transplantation for end-stage lung disease is a treatment method used in patients with a variety of pulmonary conditions, including cystic fibrosis, pulmonary fibrosis, and primary pulmonary arterial hypertension. The procedure has advanced significantly since the first successful lung transplant in 1983.  Despite these advances, the median long-term survival for lung transplant patients is 5.8 years, which is notably less than other transplant areas. A contributor to this problem is that ~25% of lung transplant patients experience primary graft dysfunction, and a significant proportion experience other complications including infections and renal failure.

A growing body of evidence suggests that a key player in these complications is intraoperative blood loss and the resulting need for blood transfusions. While the link between transfusion and patient mortality is an evolving area of research, there is evidence that understanding the predictors of blood transfusion requirements in lung transplant patients can be crucial for clinical decision-making. Knowledge of these predictors can help clinicians anticipate and prepare for potential transfusion needs, thereby enabling more precise surgical planning and resource allocation. This foresight help minimize intraoperative blood transfusion, which in turn may reduce the incidence of primary graft dysfunction and other postoperative complications. However, the specific predictors associated with the need and amount of transfusions in lung transplant patients are not entirely understood.

## Methods
Here, we leverage a dataset containing physiological and treatment information from 193 lung transplant patients receiving either a single or bilateral lung transplant from 2018-01-05 to 2018-12-30 to elucidate characteristics of patients that require transfusions, the factors influencing the need and amount of transfusions, and the impact of transfusion on patient outcomes, including mortality. We use bootstrapped Lasso regression models to identify the most influential predictors with respect to the need and amount of transfusions in these patients. We generate 2000 resamples of the dataset, each with replacement, and apply Lasso regression to each resample. Through this repetitive process, we observe the frequency of each candidate predictor’s selection across 2000 iterations of bootstrapped sampling and model training. This provided a measure of each predictor’s frequency of inclusion in the models associated with the minimum lambda, and thus their relative importance and stability, identifying those predictors that were consistently influential.

Next, we conduct survival analysis using ICU admission and discharge dates to compute survival time, which was defined as the time from ICU admission to either death or discharge. We fit a Cox proportional hazards regression model, using total RBCs transfused within 24 hours as a predictor. Kaplan-Meier curves were generated to illustrate the effect of the total number of RBCs transfused within 24 hours on patient survival.

## Results
We observe that major predictors for the total amount of red blood cells transfused over 24 hours in these patients were hemoglobin and platelet count before surgery, gender, transplant type, the use of ECMO, use of CPB, use of ex vivo lung perfusion, and albumin and crystalloid used during surgery. For Massive Transfusions, these are found to be hemoglobin and platelet count before surgery and transplant type. A much larger set of important predictors are found for the need for Any Transfusion, suggesting that it may be influenced by a wider array of factors. Overall, these results reinforce known predictors for transfusion requirements in lung transplant, but also challenge existing assumptions and introduce new variables, emphasizing the need for a nuanced and context-specific understanding of transfusion predictors across different transplant types.

We also observe that the data did not demonstrate a significant impact of RBC transfusion volume on mortality risk. This finding aligns with the observed complexity of postoperative recovery, where multiple factors intertwine to determine patient outcomes. The significant impact observed in cases of single left lung transplants and the near-significant influence of age (p = 0.0570) further underscored the multifaceted nature of post-transplant recovery.


